---
title: "An illiterate guide to classical music"
description: How I find my way into the beauty of classical music without any formal education
keywords: music, classical music
layout: articles
---

Music has been always a big part of my life. I remember my first attempts of
listening to music in the living room of my mother's best friend apartment. I
was a confused boy, ten or eleven years old. And I have vivid memories of the
first times I run into some of my favourites. Those CDs were a new shiny
media. I was always afraid of scratching their surface. I was an avid reader
of their booklets. But there was something missing. I felt the music I
listened to was the kind of collective experience I am not fond of. I was
looking for the introspective feeling you get out of more solitary activities.
Reading, writing. They have been nurturing my brain since for ever. A couple
of years later, I got into metal. And,to me, it was all about the presence of
lead guitars. I started studying the guitar a bit and tried to learn how to
read music. This process got me closed to classical music. I started listening
to some famous composers. Then, I saw what I missed in my previous experiences
with music. Classical music had something I have never felt with any other
kind of music. I felt this was the **real** thing. And I started a long
unfinished journey in the land of classical music.

Now, I know how to read music even though I am a slow reader. I can play the
guitar at amateur level. But I have no formal education in music. I have no
map for this fantastic land. I am a classical music illiterate. Despite that,
I enjoy classical music more than any other kind of music. I am aiming at
making classical music less intimidating. People often asked me how to get
started with it or which author is easy. I am aiming at making easier to jump
on this train. If I have done it with no education, no help, everyone can!

The thing about classical music is that it looks intimidating. There's so much
of it. All the tracks have those strange and super long names. There are a lot
of Italian words.
To be honest, I'm with you. It's confusing. When I got into classical music I
had a lot of questions:

- Do you listen to specific composers?
- What about performers?
- And what about conductors?
- What are all those numbers?
- What's a symphony? A fugue? A quartet?

And so on. The list is much longer but you get the idea. In order to help you
finding your way, I am going to share all the learnings I wish I knew about
when I started this long journey.

## Start easy

Classical music can get complex, there may be a lot of things going on in a
composition. And most of the time, that complexity just turns out to be boring
music for the listener. Therefore, my suggestion is to start with easy
compositions. Of course, if you know nothing about classical music, you do not
know what is easy and what is not. But there is a way out:

> What's the instrument that attracts your ear the most?

There are tons of compositions for one instrument out there and I consider
those compositions a very good start. By definition, there cannot be that much
going on. Let's assume for the sake of the discussion that the instrument that
attracts you the most is the piano.

> OK, my favourite instrument is the piano. Now what?

Well, you play it safe. Betting on the most famous composers. They are so
famous for good reasons. Start with Mozart, Beethoven. Use youtube. It's a
good source. My first query got me
[this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8hgaxI3JRgg) result. It's a "piano
concerto". There is something wrong though. There are a lot of instruments and
the piano comes after a while. And that's because a [piano
concerto](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piano_concerto). Those compositions
are focused on a piano but almost always accompanied by a large esemble,
typically an entire orchestra. This is good. We have just learned something.
Classical music compositions with the word "concerto" in it are not easy
stuff. You can skip them until you feel the urge the explore them. Whenever
that happens.
Let's try a different query: "mozart piano solo". The first result I have got
is a [stunning recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SmXn9rNWyu4) by
[Claudio Arrau](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claudio_Arrau), an incredible
Chilean pianist. We will talk about performers too but at the right time. We
have learned something else too, we know [piano
sonatas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piano_sonata) are compositions for a
single piano. This is a key learning as this works well for a lot on
instruments:

- [Violin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Violin_sonata)
- [Cello](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cello_sonata)
- [Clarinet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clarinet_sonata)

And so on. If you have a look at the wikipedia pages I have linked so far, you
will notice something very useful. Pure gold. I wish I had a list of [noted
piano sonatas] twenty years ago. I would have found out about [Sonata
PathÃ©tique](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piano_Sonata_No._8_(Beethoven)) by
Beethoven a long time ago. It is the most beautiful composition I have run
into and [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cg9KQ610biU) version leaves me
speechless every single time.

Time to recap. We have learned:

- Sonatas are good for starting out. There is only one instrument involved.
- There are sonatas for a lot of instruments.
- Wikipedia has long list you can use to explore.

This is quite some homework. You could probably go on your entire life only
exploring sonatas. There are so many. But things may get boring at some point
with one instrument.

## Explore by different dimensions

It is time to move out of the solo composition.
[Here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_musical_forms_by_era) is a list
of all the musical forms, grouped by era. Of course, there are way too many
forms. My suggestion is trying trying with "some instruments":

- [Piano trio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piano_trio)
- [String quartets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_quartet)

You can apply the same technique we have seen in the previous section.
Searching for "string quartet" on youtube gave me
["Razumovsky"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oXLKu-HglnM), a beautiful
string quartet by Beethoven. Relying on youtube suggestions may be a good idea
too.

So far, as you probably already noticed, we have explored only one dimension:
the musical form. And I think this is enough to get you started into classical
music. If you really like what you are listening to then there is a chance the
following is going to help you. It took me a while to figure out all of it so
I hope it will help you as much as I helps me now.

### Composer

OK, this may sound obvious. Of course, listening more of a composer you like
is a good strategy. There is a fair chance that if you like one or two piano
sonatas from Mozart, then you just like Mozart sonatas. But here is the trick:

> Find an album with all the compositions of the given form and composer.

Example: search for "complete piano sonata Mozart". And then listen to all of
them in sequence. It took me a while to figure out this was a good way of
exploring a composer. But when I did it gave me great joy. Your relationship
with the composer becomes more intimate. It will create a special bond to some
composers. Then, at some point, the connection will become magical. You will
have your favourite "piano sonata" composer. And your favourite "string
quartet" composer.

### Performer

This one comes with time. Some performers are really famous. And, as for
composers, there is probably a very good reason why they are so famous. One
general rule to take into account is that most performers are especially good
at something.
For example, a piano performer may be very good at Bach and not so good at
Chopin. This is pretty normal: it is a matter of their taste, focus,
sensibility and many other factors. Performers are going to have very similar
properties to composers. You are going to have your favourite Bach piano
sonatas performer (mine is [Glen
Gould](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glenn_Gould)). Or a favourite Bach cello
sonatas performer (mine is [Mischa
Maisky](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mischa_Maisky).
It is not rare for me to listen to the very same composition from different
performers. It took me some time to start doing so but now I am very happy and
methodical about it. The main reason is performers have a huge influence on
the way you are going to perceive a composition. And it happened to me a few
times to start liking a composition only after I run into a version I really
enjoyed. My best example is the overture of [La gazza
ladra](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/La_gazza_ladra) a very famous composition
by Rossini. I was never impressed by it but I can still recall exactly how I
felt the first time I run into an [incredible
version](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qdm8IfInaJg) directed by [Claudio
Abbado](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Claudio_Abbado). An important thing to
notice: when it comes about orchestras, directors act as performers in a solo
composition. It is the reason why being a director is such a big deal.

### Record labels

I still think about [Rdio](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rdio) every day
because of labels. It was very easy to browse music by companies. And when it
comes about classical music this is a very relevant feature. I found a lot of
interesting compositions or performances on Rdio because I could follow the
trail of the producing company. Now, I use Apple music and it is much harder
to do. But still something to take into account in my opinion. Good record
labels work like good newspaper. They have some sort of editorial line and
produce very good albums.

## Find your ensemble

This is what took me the longest. And to be fair, it changes over time too.
[Here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musical_ensemble#Classical_chamber_music)
you can see a good list of group types. The thing with ensembles is that they
come with specific constraints. And those constraints give composers each time
a different framework to express their ideas. You will find yourself liking a
specific kind of ensemble more than others. And I suggest you try to explore
your taste as much as possible. I can provide an example based on my
experience. In 2009, I run int a very beautiful [string
quartet]([https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_quarte
) on Radio. I remember being in my car and feeling the need to pull over to
focus on the music. It was a [melting
quartet](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cm6aglFGNHM) by Mozart. It took me
over a year to figure out the name of the composition. I was obsessed by the
main them and really wanted to know which composition it was. This experience
made me explore string quartets a lot. Mozart, Beethoven and Mendelssohn
produced incredible string quartets compositions and I love all of them now.
In my case, I think the reason I love string quartets so much is:

> There is a lot going on but not enough for me to get lost

The learning here is there are some chances some kind of ensemble will fit
your taste better and it is really worth figuring out so you can explore the
ensemble by composer, performers, labels and so on.


## How can I help

OK, if you made it here I am very happy. It was a long article and it made me
realise how much I like sharing my experience with classical music. Now, I
would like to keep sharing what I am learning. It is a never stopping learning
process so I am sure I will find out new things we can talk about. I would
like to keep some sort of database of recommendations, maybe grouped by the
dimensions we have just discussed. But I am not sure what is the best format
yet. Please do write to me on twitter or email me with suggestions if you
would like me to maintain such a database.
