---
title: "The real power of journaling"
description: Some time ago I wrote about my first experiences with journaling. Now, it's more than one year I'm doing it and it changed everything
keywords: journaling, day one, writing
layout: articles
---

I wrote about journaling a [while ago](/what-im-learning-with-journaling). At
the time, I did it because I wanted to go back to writing and share something.
It was a way of unblocking myself. I did not know yet where journaling would
take me, I think I did not even know if I wanted to keep doing it.

It turns our I keep doing it daily for more than a year and now I'm enjoying
aspects of it I did not even think about when I started. But let's proceed
with order. The first time I wrote about journaling I used a handmade solution
with vim and some scripting. It worked fine, I wanted to write journaling out
and I did not feel it was right to commit to any application, neither I felt
an actual need to do it. But then I was preparing myself for a long holiday
and I decided it was time to try something new. I bought [day
one](http://dayoneapp.com/) and never looked back. I loved the app from the
first day and kept using it since then.

Now, day one has a feature I did not understand back when I started using it.
The feature is simple and maybe even obvious. The app reminds you to have a
look at what you wrote exactly one year before the current day. When the app
started notifying me I could now use the feature, I actually did not do it. I
did not think it was such a big deal. At some point this summer thought, I
started using the feature and it was a revealing experience.

After starting university studies, I always had problems keeping my weight to
an acceptable level of self comfort. And things got much worse on August of
2010: I quit smoking after 14 years. I got completely out of shape and started
looking into diets, I tried different sports too. After a long search, I
settled for a combination of calories counting and swimming.  When I can do
both at the same time, the effect on my body is great. Many times, I got close
to a shape I'm comfortable with. And you can already see the problem, right? I
did do that many times because I always give up on one of the two. Or both. I
understood my problem was I was failing and creating a habit for those two
very vital activities in my life. I need both, they are no big deal as I can
do both. I was never able to keep them though.  Keeping this in mind, this
year I got back to swimming after my summer holidays. I started recoding the
experiences of swimming outdoor (fantastic opportunity you get every summer in
Berlin) and read what I was doing exactly one year ago. A few days in this
process and I started noticing something interesting. Actually, I remember
thinking "oh, that's funny. I'm writing about the same things I was writing
about one year ago.  Such a weird coincidence!".
Of course, this was no coincidence. I tried solving this problem many
times over the last years. I have accumulated lots of data in my head and I
never thought I would have the chance to retrospect over the data. Now, I can
already see the improvements. Because I read what I wrote one year ago. I can
figure out when I stopped swimming or how I felt about some particular aspect
of my life. This is **powerful**. Years go by like days when you become an
adult but they are still 365 days long each. It is a long time for my mind, I
was never able to figure out patterns with my own behaviour. Now I can and I
can correct what I do not like. At least, I can try.  I feel I will never give
up on journaling anymore.  Reading my past self is so much more interesting
that I ever thought it would be that I cannot imagine giving up. I hope this
short writing gives you the opportunity to try journaling out!
