---
title: "Two Years Abroad"
description: Just some thought about how it feels to live abroad for me
keywords: lucapette, expat, abroad, germany, berlin
category: myself
layout: blog
---

It's time. I thought of writing this post for a long time. It was part of my
first year *expat resolutions*. But of course I missed the appointment with my
first year. I was too busy enyoing my new life with @olia_la, loving my new
city, working with the best team ever at SponsorPay. Now, after another year,
I feel ready to wrap my mind around this experience, I feel ready to rant
about my country, I feel it's time to sum the whole thing up. Even though I
don't know the reason but who needs reasons?

But let's start from the start.

In April 2012 Olia and I rented an apartment for two weeks in Kreuzberg,
Berlin. We had absolutely no idea what to expect from the city. We came here
just to understand if we would have liked it to the point of moving here.
Well, we did like the city. It was a whole new world compared to the place
where I come from. Basically in Napoli (and mostly in Italy) we have good
weather and great food. Here it's almost the opposite. I say almost because
the food is not that bad, the weather is and I think it's not a big news. Then
what we did was renting another apartment for three months with the goal of
finding a good job for me. I applied for a few positions and I had a very
diversified experience. I got very bad offers (in terms of money), I got very
stupid interviews ("what's the result of 2^16? what data structures do you
know?" I hope wooga recruting got a bit better in the meantime...) and then I
found this fantastic team at SponsorPay. Smart people, nice numbers,
interesting organizational challenges and a vibe, a culture for shipping code
that I never saw somewhere else. It felt like living a dream.

But let's make a digression. I like digressions.

I need to step back for a second and explain how this blog post is being born
in my mind. Virtually, I started to writing it when we moved here. I needed to
wrap up things, I dreamed about wrapping up thing. It's a weaknees and since
we're at confessions it's time for confessing another thing. I'm not writing
this down in one shot. I'm writing a small piece every few days. I want to
enjoy the process. I _earned_ this. I _earned_ this fetish way of placing
things in the right spot of my head. And what makes it funny in this process
is that my mood while writing this article is going to be very spiky. Now, for
example, I'm a bit drunk and I'm trying to conclude this weird day.

But let's go back to living a dream.

This may sound surprising but the moment my new life started shaping matches
the moment of my life I hated my country the most. It took me sometime to
decode this feeling. I'm a slow person, expecially with feelings.  And I
needed my time.  Then I got to a crucial point. The very reason why I felt
so angry at my country.  When I projected myself in the process of moving
somewhere I was sure I was going to miss some things pretty badly. Well, it
didn't happen. I didn't happen at all. I missed the lack of missing things
from my country.  It's not a feeling I was prepared to digest.  It was pretty
hard to decode why I was so angry at Italy. But think about it.  I missed
nothing about Italy for a long time. Nothing at all.  I'm not sure how to
express this but it was a disturbing feeling. I was waiting for the day I
would be missing something. I earned the right of missing things but it didn't
happen.  Now, at the time of writing this, I'm not angry about my country
anymore. I just don't care. It sucks, I've turned in a white privileged health
expat that doesn't give a shit about his country. It sucks because it wasn't
really a choice. It never felt like that. My country _forced_ me into hating
it. And you know what? I don't want even to rant about it. Fuck it. And fuck
my stupid goal of rant about Italy.

It's hard to wrap two years up but it's a good exercise. I've read somewhere
that to know where you are you have to know where you come from. It's probably
true. And that's what I'm trying to do in the next sparse sentences:

- I've left SponsorPay (now Fyber) after almost 2 fantastic years. It was a love
story basically. I liked the people more than how much I dislike advertising.
And I really don't like
[advertising](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E_F5GxCwizc). As all love
stories the end is bitter but I feel a much better programmer now and I feel
lucky I had such an opportunity.

- I've joined a just born company. Very exciting times ahead and the positive
fear that I can get everything wrong.

- Olia changed her job already once that compared to three very hard Italian
style years is a great feeling.

- I feel hooked to Berlin. It feels like home, it feels like a cage some times.
It's such a good fit for me that I'm afraid I can't live anywhere else. It
feels like Ruby in this sense. I hardly choose anything else than Ruby unless
I can't use Ruby. Same for Berlin.

Now I guess it's time for some conclusions. But I'm going to disappoint you a
bit. I don't have much conclusions here. I've thought of being an expat for
years before becoming one. And it's very different from my expectations. This
confused me to the point I don't really know what's the point. I know that
those two years have been the best ever. It may be not related to moving away
from Italy. But I can hardly imagine to find SponsorPay team there. I had this
constant feeling here is Sunday morning all the time. It's always quiet. There
are almost no cars in the centre (yeah, German friends you have no idea what's
a traffic jam), the public transportation is awesome (again, German friends
you have no idea...) and I can bike all the time.

OK, I lied. I have a conclusion. I'm happy about what being an expat means for
me. And I found out that somehow I'll always feel an expat, even if I learn
German. It's a mixed-feeling.  Ah, that's the most important learning I've got
as an expat. Mixed-feelings are hard to handle but their reward is unique.
